# GWAS-Project

Genome Wide Association Studies (GWAS) are studies that are extremely important in helping scientists identify what genes are associated with certain phenotypes. They have become more widely used in the past ten years as the technology has improved and become more popular. The method uses Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs), which are small variations in the genome, as the variable being studied. Researchers gather the genomes of a large group of subjects, then identify SNPs that occur more frequently in the genomes of people with the desired phenotype. GWAS is extremely efficient in that it can observe hundreds of thousands of SNPs at the same time. Once SNPs identified with certain diseases have been identified, this information can be used to help determine an individual's likelihood of developing a disease. GWAS has also been used to assess what an individual's response to a drug may be (Medline Genetics). An important statistic in GWAS is Linkage Disequilibrium (LD), which can be used to pre-screen the genome and select SNPs for genotyping. Linkage disequilibrium simply refers to how often two alleles are observed together within a population (Pritchard and Przeworski). 
	
Various software tools are used to analyze, interpret, and visualize GWAS results. One tool used to analyze GWAS is called PLINK. PLINK performs a wide variety of large-scale analysis techniques, specifically on position-based SNP data. The original workshop we were given uses an older version of PLINK, which was more recently updated to PLINK 1.9. The newer version has an overall update to the speed, efficiency, and functionality of the software. PLINK has different file types for data analysis, such as .ped (short for pedigree) and .map, which contains data such as IDs and phenotypes or chromosome number and snp identifiers, respectively. While PLINK helps with the initial analysis of GWAS data, LocusZoom is a tool that helps to visualize the finished data. It takes the PLINK output as its input, and plots the results in an interpretable form that can be converted to .png image formats for accessibility. In this tutorial, there will be many different types of data that will be visualized in their appropriate graphs. For example, a Manhattan Plot can be used to visualize the -log10(p) values vs each chromosome number. 

Paragraph 3: (Aaron will extend later). With the genotype, file formats, and translations in the tutorial being updated, the visualizations will consequently become different as well. That is why to be consistent with the data, we will also be changing the “storyline” of the tutorial to correspond. Our initial idea for the data is to play with the phenotypes of LUwolf. 
